well hi everybody following along from
my stories about individual Stars I've
chosen to look at Sirius the brightest
star in the night sky this
time very visible at the moment if you
can find a ryion and a Ryan's Belt you
can use it as a set of pointers follow
it down and to the left and you just
can't miss Sirus above the Horizon at
the moment as I said it's the brightest
star in the sky it's not as bright as
the planets Mars Venus and Jupiter that
are around at the moment um and it never
is really but uh very very uh prominent
in the night sky at the
moment so why is it so bright
well things can be bright either because
they're powerful or because they're
nearby and people have tried to measure
the distance to sirius for quite a
number of years years the first attempt
is documented in Christian huan's book
Cosmos where they measured The Parallax
the apparent shift in position over a
six-month period using the Earth's orbit
as a Baseline and seeing that a nearby
star changes position against the
background and he measured that angle as
7.5 Arc seconds now an arc second is a
60th of an arc minute and an Mark minute
is a 60th of a degree so this is
7.5
3,600 of a degree which is pretty
tiny um and so it's not surprising that
with the technology of the time these
measurements were very difficult but
from that estimate he came out with a
distance of 28,000 astronomical units
and Au is the distance from the Earth to
the Sun so a very long thin Tri triangle
it would have been 2 Au across the
Baseline and 28,000 tall that's a very
thin triangle corresponds to a distance
in modern measures of just under half a
light year so a light Ray would take six
months to cover that
distance other people attempted the same
thing gradually using better equipment
and The Parallax estimates started
coming down to six and then down to four
Ark seconds um four Arc seconds roughly
doubles the distance so we're talking
about maybe one light year but uh again
this is limited by the Precision when
you look through a telescope from the
ground you're looking up through the air
and often the limiting resolution of
your telescope is controlled by the
turbulence in the air and that can be as
much as three Arc seconds quite easily
so these measurements are very very
tricky indeed
during the
1830s Henderson and mcle both had a go
at this problem and they got a much
lower value uh they got between a
quarter and a half of an arcc very very
fine measurement indeed and that would
put the star much further
away and with the hipparcos satellite
going into space and being able to avoid
all that problem with turbulence we were
able to pin it down to point4 of an arcc
and a distance of 8.6 light years now
8.6 light years puts it in our backyard
it makes Sirus one of the Stars nearest
to the sun you can see a few of them on
the diagram here you can see Alpha
centuri which is the nearest at 4.2
light years that's a triple star system
I've already done a video about Alpha
centuri and it's companions you've got
Barnard star second at six light years
and there's ious over there to the left
at 8.6 light years so it actually comes
out as the eighth closest star to the
Sun or if you like the fifth closest
star system because some of these star
systems are multiple
stars but once we have an accurate
measurement of the distance and we can
clearly see how bright the star appears
to be by virtue of the standard candle
rule so that if you had a candle burning
with a known brightness and you moved it
twice as far away you would see a
quarter of the light because the light
from the candle flame would be spreading
out over the surface of a sphere around
it and at a given radius the sphere has
a an area of 4 Pi * R 2ar so the amount
of light in any given piece of the
sphere any given meter Square will be
um uh proportional to one over the
radius squared so you double the
distance you divide it by four you
triple the distance you divide it by
nine and so
forth so with the brightness that it
appears and the distance we can work out
the true power output and that comes out
at 25 times that of our sun so a fair
amount more powerful we can also look at
the star the color of the light tells us
the temp temperature and we can look at
the Spectrum as well and get more
information that way and this is a hot
star you'd expect it to be hot given
that it's burning 25 times as brightly
and it's just under 10,000 Dees 8 uh
9845 Kelvin and that makes it an a white
hot class
star we could also use that to estimate
the
mass from the power output and our
knowledge of other stars these days we
can make a pretty good guess that its
mass is double that of the sun and it is
amazing that just doubling the um Mass
makes such a star burn 25 times faster
it's a really dramatic in increase in
the power output and that's true for all
stars the uh the power output is very
very sensitive to the uh amount of mass
that you
have I think it goes up nearly with the
fourth power something like that very
rare formula in physics to grow that
quickly we can also look at the Spectrum
of the light look at the elements that
are present and try to make estimates of
the age of serus you can see it roughly
in the middle the White Band of the main
sequence there so it's just a main
sequence star it's still consuming
hydrogen in its core turning it into
helium releasing lots of energy um and
very much a youngster just 250 million
years since it was
formed there are a lot of metal heavy
elements present even iron present in
the surface layer of the star and that's
a little bit of a puzzle when you start
looking at it to begin with and so that
actually confused people for quite a
number of
years more of that
later the other thing that was noticed
back in the 1700s was that it was moving
across the sky moving across our line of
sight the So-Cal proper motion so it's
moving through space along a true motion
axis and we see that as traversing the
sky laterally its proper Motion Plus of
course there's some radial velocity
along the line of sight which you don't
notice just by looking at it Edmund hle
had a go at this and he noticed that
several of them were moving and figured
out that uh the moon uh sorry that
Sirius had moved by the diameter of the
Moon in about 18800 years by comparing
the position with that of ancient
records including those of
tmy so quite a rapid progress across the
sky other people subsequently attempted
to look at the spectral lines and see
the red shift and make estimates of the
red shift but the early estimat were uh
a bit wrong should we say they were in
the wrong direction and too
big 1844 Frederick Bessel had a go at
astrometry uh that's measuring the
movement of the star across the sky and
very very precisely tracking its path he
could see that it was executing a a
wobble pattern and you can see that in
the diagram there a very fine Ark second
Precision needed to track this but from
1844 onwards you could see that curved
path that would undergo a a long
sweeping curve and then a quick wiggle
back onto course again and uh you can
see the dates going all the way down
into the 2000s there over many cycles
now obviously not all his data but what
he realized was that this wobble was
probably being caused by the gravity of
a companion object tugging on the main
star that we couldn't see and he could
see that the periodicity was around 50
years I mean it takes a long time to
make measurements like this um it's a
life's work but this would suggest that
the companion star should be quite
massive if it's at managing to exert
enough of an influence for us to measure
you may recall that people tried to do
discover planets this way and uh it
really wasn't very successful because
the wobble induced by planets is just
not large
enough so the stage was then set for
Alvin Clark the famous telescope maker
in 1864 he just built and was testing
the
18.5in refractor which was the largest
telescope in the world at the time at
the Dearborn observatory in
Chicago and as you would he chose a nice
bright star in this case Sirius as a
test Target to see whether the telescope
was performing well and what he spotted
in the image was that there was a little
tiny dim companion right next to the
main primary just at magnitude 8.4 so uh
six times seven times more faint than
you would ever be able to see with a
naked eye of course you would never see
it because of the brightness of its very
uh
much adjacent uh brighter companion the
AAR that we all see but this was the
discovery now this star was very very
interesting wasn't the first of its kind
but it was perhaps the
nearest this is an image of it taken
with the Hubble Space Telescope the big
star in the center there that is the
main star Sirius showing a lot of
defraction rings and spikes but not far
away from it is the little tiny dot
Sirius B the companion star IM imaged
here uh
directly and what people were able to do
once the star was visible was to track
the orbit and what we found is that the
two stars are orbiting their Common
Center of mass and the result of this is
that there is an elliptical orbit and
that accounts for the rather strange
wobble pattern that Frederick Bessel had
discovered with the long slow part of
the wobble when the stars are far apart
in their ellip iCal orbit and when
they're close together a much more rapid
change that's absolutely in accord with
Kepler's laws of planetary motion that
say that uh equal areas are swept out in
equal times and that the planets move in
ellipses and that um they move very
quickly when they're close in on the
ellipse and much slower when they're
further
away and with Kepler's thirdd Law the
one that tells us that the period
squared is proportional to the radius
cubed well here we can measure both the
period and the radius and we plug that
into Kepler's uh equation courtesy of
Isaac Newton's derivation of it we
discover what the mass of the system
must be and this tells us that the mass
of the main star is 2.1 solar masses and
the companion weighs in just less at
98% of the mass of the Sun well that's
quite curious because an ordinary star
like the Sun at that sort of distance
should be magnitude four when we look at
it which should have been obvious uh but
to find that it's uh four and a half
magnitudes fainter than that means that
there's something unusual about it it's
1500th of the mass that the sun is sorry
1 1500th of the brightness that the sun
is despite having almost the same
mass and when they measured the spectrum
of it they found that it was incredibly
hot 25,000 de way hotter than the 10,000
of the primary star or the 5,000 of a
sunlight
star um nowadays we have x-ray
telescopes and the picture on the right
is an x-ray image and in that image you
can see that Sirius B the little one is
nearly as bright as the main star giving
off those
x-rays so this is a very uh hot massive
star but very very faint in the visible
part of the spectrum the reason is it's
giving off a lot of light in the short
wavelengths the ultraviolet and x-rays
it's where the power is being emitted
due to that immensely high
temperature and this is very much a
white dwarf star it was one that was uh
perhaps the most famous of the lot there
were some others there van man and star
which we might talk about another day
that was one of the first white dwarfs
to be identified because it's actually
on its own it wasn't hiding next to a
brighter companion but a white dwarf
star turns out to have roughly the mass
of the Sun a lot of them are maybe half
to one times the mass of the Sun and
with a size approximately equal to the
earth now that's amazing because they
must be super dense if you were to
compress the mass of the sun down to the
size of the Earth well a million earths
would fit inside the current volume of
the Sun so white dwarfs to weigh the
mass of the Earth sorry the mass of the
Sun in the size of the Earth they must
be a million times as dense as the sun
uh and indeed that would give us this
metaphor at the bottom of a lump of
sugar coming in weighing a ton if it was
made of white dwarf material
the other fact on the screen there
vesque 0.02 C that's telling us that the
escape Velocity is 150th of the speed of
light from these things it's the gravity
is really getting very severe
indeed so we have this white dwarf star
in orbit around
a ordinary star that is a little bit
more massive and a lot brighter than the
Sun and they've both been there for
about 250 million years that's the age
estimate so the AAR Serius a 2.1 solar
masses blue white main sequence hydrogen
fusing star it's got about another 750
million years of fuel left before it
will go off onto the red giant path and
start to swell up and so forth so a long
time yet but Sirius B born at the same
time must have been born larger we
estimate five times the mass of the Sun
so more than double its companion and
that larger Mass would have made it very
very hot we're talking 20,000 degrees on
the surface blue hot a bclass star and
it would have used all of its hydrogen
up in just 100 million years on that
basis so at an age of 250 million years
and a lifespan of 100 million years it's
not surprising that it swelled into a
red giant some time
ago got massive enough sorry High dense
enough in the center from its mass to
compress the
hydrogen compress all the helium in the
center and ignite the helium to start
fusing that via the triple Alpha process
to make carbon and oxygen deep inside
the core not hot enough to go further
and start burning the carbon and oxygen
up to heavier elements but it would have
gone through these two stages so it
would have formed a red giant then a
helium burning Yellow Giant then back to
um an asymptotic giant Branch star an
AGB star a double shell burning star
burning hydrogen in one shell helium in
the next and with an in inert core down
deep of carbon and oxygen left over Ash
but after a total of about 120 million
years so 100 million years on the main
sequence and 20 million years as a giant
it would have exhausted its options it
wouldn't be able to carry on doing any
fusion and it would have died by puffing
off its outer layers as a planetary
nebula and leaving just the core the
carbon oxygen core as the white war star
that we see
today so that's uh would have been quite
spectacular if you happened to be around
when the dinosaurs were around the Syria
system would have been even brighter you
would have been looking not just at the
power output of the star we see today
but the much greater power output of its
blue white
companion and
then at some point it would have turned
into a red giant and uh been absolutely
astonishing up there in the sky and even
brighter as a red giant even though
they're cooler they're so much larger
the total light output is
tremendous so the dinosaurs must have
had quite a
sight however there is an interesting
wrinkle to this story which is what
really brought me to have a look at it
and this is known as the red serus
controversy back in ad. 140 toy again
wrote in elag guest about the colors of
stars and he lists serious as red along
with bleers antaris alaron Arcturus and
Pollock now those we see as red today
but sirious we see as white so could it
be that actually the red giant phase of
Sirus B lasted until less than 2,000
years ago um that doesn't seem right it
would uh be possible if Sirus B had been
less massive to start with that it would
have lived a bit
longer and it could just be that it was
a red giant back then well interesting
it would have been a lot brighter as a
red giant as I've already said and that
doesn't seem to quite
fit and also we would probably still be
able to see the planetary nebula if it
had only died to form a a white dwarf
the planetary nebula tend to live for
50,000 years so the nebula is missing it
probably isn't right but there is one
reason for this and if you look at the
records of other cultures such as the
Chinese they do not record it as red
there are several people in the West in
the Egyptian and uh Middle Eastern
cultures that recorded as red it's not
just toy so why the difference well
Sirius was used as a marker for the
beginning of the flooding of the Nile
the season of the floods in the Middle
East it's called The heliacal Rising
this is where the uh journey of the sun
round the sky really because the Earth
is moving in orbit around it changes its
position against the background Stars
once a year and whilst the star is in
the daylight part of the sky you don't
see it but there's a particular date for
each star when it makes its first clear
appearance Just Before Dawn above the
Horizon and that's called the heliacal
rising Rising relative to the Sun so
just before the sun comes up Sirius
would come up on the 19th of June and
the would signal that the Nile was about
to enter its flood
period and this was very very important
to
the uh culture of the Middle East of
course absolutely vital to know when
this was going to happen and so a lot of
people spent a lot of time observing
Sirius when it was very low in the sky
and things that are low in the sky the
blue light is scattered by the the dirt
in the atmosphere leaving just the
longer wavelengths so it could be that
these records of Sirius were at the hel
akle Rising very low in the sky and they
were recording it red in the same way
that the sun looks red at sunset and
sunrise so maybe it's a much more
prosaic and ordinary explanation for it
uh but wouldn't it have been fun it had
it been the red giant phase that would
have been interesting
another strange thing about Sirius it's
called the dog star it's called the dog
star because of the dog days of summer
and the Roman and Egyptian Traditions
again but it turns out there's a tribe
in West Africa called the dog
on and it there are reports that say
that they have traditions and uh
cultural knowledge that tells them about
the existence of Sirius B and its
50-year orbit around the main
star now that doesn't make any sense
because they don't have telescopes and
technology and access to the Alvin Clark
18.5 in telescope that discovered it or
anything better and more modern since it
just makes no sense they couldn't
possibly know about or have or have
observed this now some people say that
this this is because aliens visited the
planet and told them but the most likely
explanation is that there was a total
solar eclipse and in 1893 a French
astronomical Expedition went down to the
area to set up and try and observe the
eclipse and probably gave the game away
then U but it doesn't half spawn some
conspiracy
theories
now I actually had a go at Imaging
Sirius B it was a real Challenge and uh
I used the 14in me
lx600 Schmid cigra telescope with a me
DSi Mark 2 imager to capture the image
that you see on the left there pointed
to by the arrows of
Sirius back a few years ago now when the
pop the Sirius B Star was actually
orbiting around towards the maximum um
elongation it wasn't at maximum but it
was coming away from its minimum and it
was about five Arc seconds separation at
that point and uh the image there is the
result of 700 individual frames of uh
data five milliseconds each that's then
being added and stacked and then in
conjunction with another astronomer
called Paul leand hi Paul if you're
watching uh we analyze the data and you
get this brightness graph moving from
the center of the object out towards the
edge the center is obviously very bright
up at about 30,000 counts there and it
decays away but there is the little hump
to the side there corresponding to five
uh uh units away from the edge and that
matched the predicted position of Sirius
B in terms of it being five AR seconds
um I think it's uh that was back in 2019
that I did this work and uh so yeah it
was uh a very interesting little project
I've just read that it says seven Arc
seconds on the bottom there so maybe
that was the correct figure but anyway
it's five clicks on the uh radius axis
which uh is probably not measured in
directly in Arc seconds but I thought
you'd be interested see that so it is
possible the maximum separation was two
years ago and it's now closing up again
now so um in 203 years time it'll be D
back down to being unobservable and
you'll have to wait till it goes round
again so if you want to have a go this
try in the next year or so you probably
stand the best possible
chance so thanks very much for listening
I hope you've enjoyed that little
Whistle Stop tour around Sirus and Sirus
B and I'll see you on the next one